.TH CALAMARES "8"
.SH NAME
calamares \- distribution-independent system installer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B calamares
[\fI\,options\/\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B calamares
is a distribution-independent system installer, with an advanced partitioning
feature for both manual and automated partitioning operations. It is the
first installer with an automated “Replace Partition” option, which makes it
easy to reuse a partition over and over for distribution testing. Calamares is
designed to be customizable by distribution maintainers without need for
cumbersome patching, thanks to third party branding and external modules
support.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Displays this help.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Displays version information.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-debug\fR
Debugging mode for testing purposes. Implies \fB\-D8\fR and \fB\-c.\fR.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR <level>
Sets logging-level. Higher numbers are more verbose.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-config\fR <config>
Configuration directory to use, for testing purposes.
.TP
\fB\-X\fR, \fB\-\-xdg-config\fR
Use XDG environment variables for file lookup.
.TP
\fB\-T\fR, \fB\-\-debug-translation\fR
Use translations from current directory.

.SH "FILES"

.B calamares
reads its configuration from many files.
The first configuration file is
.BI settings.conf
which is located in one of the configuration locations.
When started with \fB\-d\fR
.B calamares
looks in the current directory for a settings file.
When started with \fB\-X\fR
.B calamares
looks in the directories specified by
.BI XDG_CONFIG_DIRS
for a settings file.
If no settings file is found elsewhere,
.B calamares
looks in pre-configured directories like
.BI /etc
\fB\fR.

The contents of the
.BI settings.conf
file dictate where other configuration files are located, and
which configuration files are used.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The
.B calamares
website: https://calamares.io
\fB\fR.

The command-line arguments for
.B calamares
are primarily for developers convenience and should not be needed
in nearly any situation in which
.B calamares
is deployed. Most live CD environments and OEM installations should
have installed configuration files in their correct system-wide locations.

.SH "BUGS"
Please report any bugs to https://github.com/calamares/calamares/issues

.SH AUTHORS
.B calamares
is written by Teo Mrnjavac <teo@kde.org>,
Adriaan de Groot <groot@kde.org> and
an international group of contributors.
.LP
This man page is written by Jonathan Carter <jcarter@linux.com>
